Add "Making HTTP requests" cookbook article with Guzzle and PSR interface examples (#247)
yiisoft/docs: cookbook/en/making-http-requests.md

# Making HTTP requests

> When building modern web applications, you often need to make HTTP requests to external APIs, microservices, or third-party services. This article demonstrates how to make HTTP requests in Yii3 applications using Guzzle with PSR (PHP Standards Recommendations) interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When building modern applications, you often need to make HTTP requests to external APIs. This article demonstrates how to make HTTP requests in Yii3 applications using Guzzle with and [PSR interfaces](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/).
```

## What are PSR interfaces for HTTP

The PHP-FIG (PHP Framework Interoperability Group) has defined several PSR standards for HTTP handling:

> - **PSR-7**: HTTP message interfaces for requests and responses
> - **PSR-18**: HTTP client interface for sending PSR-7 requests and returning PSR-7 responses
> - **PSR-17**: HTTP factory interfaces for creating PSR-7 message objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PSR-7**: HTTP message interfaces for requests and responses
- **PSR-17**: HTTP factory interfaces for creating PSR-7 message objects
- **PSR-18**: HTTP client interface for sending PSR-7 requests and returning PSR-7 responses
```

Using these interfaces ensures your code is framework-agnostic and follows established PHP standards.

## Installation

### Install Guzzle HTTP client

Install the Guzzle HTTP client with PSR-18 support:

```shell

> composer require guzzlehttp/guzzle --prefer-dist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composer require guzzlehttp/guzzle
```

```

> ### Install PSR factories (optional)

Reviewer: This is not optional for our examples. Do in the same step as guzzle itself.

For creating PSR-7 requests and responses manually, you can install PSR-17 factories:

```shell

> composer require guzzlehttp/psr7 --prefer-dist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composer require guzzlehttp/psr7
```

```

## Basic usage

### Simple GET request

Here's how to make a basic GET request using PSR-18 interfaces:

```php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

> use GuzzleHttp\Client;

Reviewer: No need to import it, it is not used.

class ApiService
{
    public function __construct(
        private ClientInterface $httpClient,
        private RequestFactoryInterface $requestFactory,
    ) {
    }

    public function fetchUserData(int $userId): ResponseInterface
    {
        $request = $this->requestFactory->createRequest(
            'GET',
            "https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/{$userId}"
        );

        return $this->httpClient->sendRequest($request);
    }
}
```

### POST request with JSON data

Here's an example of making a POST request with JSON payload:

```php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

use Psr\Http\Client\ClientInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\RequestFactoryInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\StreamFactoryInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;

class UserService
{
    public function __construct(
        private ClientInterface $httpClient,
        private RequestFactoryInterface $requestFactory,
        private StreamFactoryInterface $streamFactory,
    ) {
    }

    public function createUser(array $userData): ResponseInterface
    {
        $jsonData = json_encode($userData, JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR);
        $stream = $this->streamFactory->createStream($jsonData);

>         $request = $this->requestFactory->createRequest('POST', 'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users')

Reviewer: Use example.com instead.

            ->withHeader('Content-Type', 'application/json')
            ->withHeader('Accept', 'application/json')
            ->withBody($stream);

        return $this->httpClient->sendRequest($request);
    }
}
```

## Configuration in Yii3

### Container configuration

Configure the HTTP client and PSR factories in your DI container:

```php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

// config/common/http-client.php

use GuzzleHttp\Client;
use GuzzleHttp\Psr7\HttpFactory;
use Psr\Http\Client\ClientInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\RequestFactoryInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseFactoryInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\StreamFactoryInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\UriFactoryInterface;

return [
    ClientInterface::class => [
        'class' => Client::class,
        '__construct()' => [
            'config' => [
                'timeout' => 30,
                'connect_timeout' => 10,
            ],
        ],
    ],
    
    RequestFactoryInterface::class => HttpFactory::class,
    ResponseFactoryInterface::class => HttpFactory::class,
    StreamFactoryInterface::class => HttpFactory::class,

>     UriFactoryInterface::class => HttpFactory::class,

Reviewer: This is problematic since there could be non-guzzle implementation of PSR-7 used already. Is there a better way?

>     UriFactoryInterface::class => HttpFactory::class,

Reviewer: This is problematic since there could be non-guzzle implementation of PSR-7 used already. Is there a better way?

        // Add request/response logging middleware
        $stack->push(Middleware::log(
            $this->logger,
            new \GuzzleHttp\MessageFormatter('HTTP {method} {uri} - {code} {phrase}')
        ));
        
        // Add retry middleware
        $stack->push(Middleware::retry(
            function (int $retries, RequestInterface $request) {
                return $retries < 3;
            }
        ));

        return new Client([
            'handler' => $stack,
            'timeout' => 30,
        ]);
    }
}
```

### Async requests

For better performance when making multiple requests, you can use asynchronous requests:

```php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

use GuzzleHttp\Client;
use GuzzleHttp\Promise\PromiseInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;

class BatchApiService
{
    public function __construct(
        private Client $httpClient,
    ) {
    }

    /**
     * @param array<int> $userIds
     * @return array<ResponseInterface>
     */
    public function fetchMultipleUsers(array $userIds): array
    {
        $promises = [];
        
        foreach ($userIds as $userId) {
            $promises[$userId] = $this->httpClient->getAsync(

>                 "https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/{$userId}"

Reviewer: Use example.com

            );
        }

        // Wait for all requests to complete
        $responses = \GuzzleHttp\Promise\settle($promises)->wait();
        
        $results = [];
        foreach ($responses as $userId => $response) {
            if ($response['state'] === PromiseInterface::FULFILLED) {
                $results[$userId] = $response['value'];
            }
        }
        
        return $results;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Add a note that this feature isn't part of PSR interfaces, so the code will depend on Guzzle explicitly.
